.TH CAKE 8 "15 October 2015" "iproute2" "Linux"
.SH NAME
CAKE \- COMMON Applications Kept Enhanced (CAKE)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tc qdisc ... cake
.br
	[
.B bandwidth RATE
|
.B unlimited
|
.B autorate_ingress
]
.br
	[
.B rtt
TIME |
.B datacenter
|
.B lan
|
.B metro
|
.B regional
|
.B internet
|
.B oceanic
|
.B satellite
|
.B interplanetary
]
.br
	[
.B besteffort
|
.B squash
|
.B precedence
|
.B diffserv8
|
.B diffserv4
|
.B diffserv3
|
.B diffserv-llt
]
.br
	[
.B flowblind
|
.B srchost
|
.B dsthost
|
.B hosts
|
.B flows
|
.B dual-srchost
|
.B dual-dsthost
|
.B triple-isolate
]
.br
	[
.B nat
|
.B nonat
]
.br
	[
.B ptm
|
.B atm
|
.B noatm
]
.br
	[
.B overhead BYTES
|
.B conservative
|
.B raw
]
.br
	[
.B mpu
BYTES
]
.br
	[
.B memlimit
SIZE
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
CAKE (Common Applications Kept Enhanced) is a shaping queue discipline which uses both AQM and FQ.
It combines COBALT, which is an AQM algorithm combining Codel and BLUE,
a shaper which operates in deficit mode, and a variant of DRR for flow isolation.
An 8-way set-associative hashing is used to virtually eliminate hash collisions.
Priority queuing is available through a simplified diffserv implementation.
Overhead compensation for various encapsulation schemes is tightly integrated.

All settings are optional; the default settings are chosen to be sensible in most common deployments.
Most people will only need to set the
.B bandwidth
parameter to get useful results, but reading the
.B Overhead Compensation
and
.B Round Trip Time
sections is strongly encouraged.


.SH SHAPER PARAMETERS
CAKE uses a deficit-mode shaper, which does not exhibit the initial burst typical of token-bucket shapers.
It will automatically burst precisely as much as required to maintain the configured throughput.
As such, it is very straightforward to configure.
.PP
.B unlimited
(default)
.br
	No limit on the bandwidth.
.PP
.B bandwidth
RATE
.br
	Set the shaper bandwidth.  See
.BR tc(8)
or examples below for details of the RATE value.
.PP
.B autorate_ingress
.br
	Automatic capacity estimation based on traffic arriving at this qdisc.
This is most likely to be useful with cellular links, which tend to change quality randomly.  A
.B bandwidth
parameter can be used in conjunction to specify an initial estimate.
The shaper will periodically be set to a bandwidth slightly below the estimated rate.
This estimator cannot estimate the bandwidth of links downstream of itself.

.SH OVERHEAD COMPENSATION PARAMETERS
The size of each packet on the wire may differ from that seen by Linux.
The following parameters allow CAKE to compensate for this difference by internally considering
each packet to be bigger than Linux informs it.
To assist users who are not expert network engineers, keywords have been provided
to represent a number of common link technologies.

.SS	Manual Overhead Specification
.B overhead
BYTES
.br
	Adds BYTES to the size of each packet.  BYTES may be negative; values between -64 and 256 (inclusive) are accepted.
.PP
.B mpu
BYTES
.br
	Rounds each packet (including overhead) up to a minimum length BYTES. BYTES may not be negative; values between 0 and 256 (inclusive) are accepted.
.PP
.B atm
.br
	Compensates for ATM cell framing, which is normally found on ADSL links.  This is performed after the
.B overhead
parameter above.  ATM uses fixed 53-byte cells, each of which can carry 48 bytes payload.
.PP
.B ptm
.br
	Compensates for PTM encoding, which is normally found on VDSL2 links and uses a 64b/65b encoding scheme.
.PP
.B noatm
.br
	Disables ATM and PTM compensation.

.SS	Failsafe Overhead Keywords
These two keywords are provided for quick-and-dirty setup.  Use them if you can't be bothered to read the rest of this section.
.PP
.B raw
(default)
.br
	Turns off all overhead compensation in CAKE.  The packet size reported by Linux will be used directly.
.PP
	Other overhead keywords may be added after "raw".  The effect of this is to make the overhead compensation operate
relative to the reported packet size, not the underlying IP packet size.
.PP
.B conservative
.br
	Compensates for more overhead than is likely to occur on any widely-deployed link technology.
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 48 atm.

.SS ADSL Overhead Keywords
Most ADSL modems have a way to check which framing scheme is in use.
Often this is also specified in the settings document provided by the ISP.
The keywords in this section are intended to correspond with these sources of information.
All of them implicitly set the
.B atm
flag.
.PP
.B pppoa-vcmux
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 10 atm
.PP
.B pppoa-llc
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 14 atm
.PP
.B pppoe-vcmux
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 32 atm
.PP
.B pppoe-llcsnap
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 40 atm
.PP
.B bridged-vcmux
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 24 atm
.PP
.B bridged-llcsnap
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 32 atm
.PP
.B ipoa-vcmux
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 8 atm
.PP
.B ipoa-llcsnap
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 16 atm
.PP
See also the Ethernet Correction Factors section below.

.SS VDSL2 Overhead Keywords
ATM was dropped from VDSL2 in favour of PTM, which is a much more straightforward framing scheme.
Some ISPs retained PPPoE for compatibility with their existing back-end systems.
.PP
.B pppoe-ptm
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 27 ptm
.PP
.B bridged-ptm
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 19 ptm
.PP
See also the Ethernet Correction Factors section below.

.SS DOCSIS Cable Overhead Keyword
DOCSIS is the universal standard for providing Internet service over cable-TV infrastructure.

In this case, the actual on-wire overhead is less important than the packet size the head-end equipment uses for shaping and metering.
This is specified to be an Ethernet frame including the CRC (aka FCS).
.PP
.B docsis
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 18 mpu 64 noatm

.SS Ethernet Overhead Keywords
.PP
.B ethernet
.br
	Accounts for Ethernet's preamble, inter-frame gap, and Frame Check Sequence.  Use this keyword when the bottleneck being shaped for is an actual Ethernet cable.
.br
	Equivalent to
.B overhead 38 mpu 84 noatm
.PP
.B ether-vlan
.br
	Adds 4 bytes to the overhead compensation, accounting for a VLAN header appended to the Ethernet frame header.  NB: Some ISPs use one or even two of these within PPPoE; this keyword may be repeated as necessary to express this.

.SH ROUND TRIP TIME PARAMETERS
Active Queue Management (AQM) consists of embedding congestion signals in the packet flow, which
receivers use to instruct senders to slow down when the queue is persistently occupied.  CAKE
uses ECN signalling when available, and packet drops otherwise, according to a combination of the
Codel and BLUE AQM algorithms called COBALT.

Very short latencies require a very rapid AQM response to adequately control latency.
However, such a rapid response tends to impair throughput when the actual RTT is relatively long.
CAKE allows specifying the RTT it assumes for tuning various parameters.  Actual RTTs within
an order of magnitude of this will generally work well for both throughput and latency management.
.PP
.B rtt
TIME
.br
	Manually specify an RTT.
.PP
.B datacenter
.br
	For extremely high-performance networks only.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 100us.
.PP
.B lan
.br
	For typical Ethernet and Wi-Fi networks, at home or in the office.  Don't use this
when shaping for an Internet access link.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 1ms.
.PP
.B metro
.br
	For traffic mostly within a single city.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 10ms.
.PP
.B regional
.br
	For traffic mostly within a European-sized country.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 30ms.
.PP
.B internet
(default)
.br
	This is suitable for typical Internet traffic.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 100ms.
.PP
.B oceanic
.br
	For Internet traffic with generally above-average latency, such as that suffered by Australasian residents.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 300ms.
.PP
.B satellite
.br
	For traffic via geostationary satellites.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 1000ms.
.PP
.B interplanetary
.br
	So named because Jupiter is about 1 light-hour from Earth.  Use this to (almost) completely disable AQM actions.  Equivalent to
.B rtt 3600s.

.SH FLOW ISOLATION PARAMETERS
With flow isolation enabled, CAKE places packets from different flows into different queues,
each of which carries its own AQM state.  Packets from each queue are then delivered fairly,
according to a DRR++ algorithm which minimises latency for "sparse" flows.  CAKE uses a set-associative
hashing algorithm to minimise flow collisions.

These keywords specify whether fairness based on source address, destination address,
individual flows, or any combination of those is desired.
.PP
.B flowblind
.br
	Disables flow isolation; all traffic passes through a single queue for each tin.
.PP
.B srchost
.br
	Flows are defined only by source address.  Could be useful on the egress path of an ISP backhaul.
.PP
.B dsthost
.br
	Flows are defined only by destination address.  Could be useful on the ingress path of an ISP backhaul.
.PP
.B hosts
.br
	Flows are defined by source-destination host pairs.  This is host isolation, rather than flow isolation.
.PP
.B flows
.br
	Flows are defined by the entire 5-tuple of source address, destination address, transport
protocol, source port and destination port.  This is the type of flow isolation performed by
SFQ and fq_codel.
.PP
.B dual-srchost
.br
	Flows are defined by the 5-tuple, and fairness is applied first over source addresses, then
over individual flows.  Good for use on egress traffic from a LAN to the internet, where it'll
prevent any one LAN host from monopolising the uplink, regardless of the number of flows they use.
.PP
.B dual-dsthost
.br
	Flows are defined by the 5-tuple, and fairness is applied first over destination addresses, then
over individual flows.  Good for use on ingress traffic to a LAN from the internet, where it'll
prevent any one LAN host from monopolising the downlink, regardless of the number of flows they use.
.PP
.B triple-isolate
(default)
.br
	Flows are defined by the 5-tuple, and fairness is applied over source *and* destination addresses
intelligently (ie. not merely by host-pairs), and also over individual flows.  Use this if you're
not certain whether to use dual-srchost or dual-dsthost; it'll do both jobs at once, preventing
any one host on *either* side of the link from monopolising it with a large number of flows.
.PP
.B nat
.br
	Instructs Cake to perform a NAT lookup before applying flow-isolation rules, to determine the true
addresses and port numbers of the packet, to improve fairness between hosts "inside" the NAT.  This
has no practical effect in "flowblind" or "flows" modes, or if NAT is performed on a different host.
.PP
.B nonat
(default)
.br
	Cake will not perform a NAT lookup.  Flow isolation will be performed using the addresses and
port numbers directly visible to the interface Cake is attached to.

.SH PRIORITY QUEUE PARAMETERS
CAKE can divide traffic into "tins" based on the Diffserv field.  Each tin has its own independent
set of flow-isolation queues, and is serviced based on a WRR algorithm.  To avoid perverse Diffserv
marking incentives, tin weights have a "priority sharing" value when bandwidth used by that tin is
below a threshold, and a lower "bandwidth sharing" value when above.  Bandwidth is compared against
the threshold using the same algorithm as the deficit-mode shaper.

Detailed customisation of tin parameters is not provided.  The following presets perform all necessary
tuning, relative to the current shaper bandwidth and RTT settings.
.PP
.B besteffort
.br
	Disables priority queuing by placing all traffic in one tin.
.PP
.B precedence
.br
	Enables legacy interpretation of TOS "Precedence" field.  Use of this preset on the modern Internet is firmly discouraged.
.PP
.B diffserv-llt
.br
	Provides a "Latency-Loss Tradeoff" implementation with five tins:
.br
		Low Loss (TOS1, TOS2), 100% threshold, increased Codel target.
.br
		Best Effort (general), 100% threshold, normal Codel target & interval.
.br
		Low Latency (TOS4, TOS5, VA, EF), 100% threshold, reduced Codel interval.
.br
		Bulk (CS1), 6.25% threshold, normal Codel target & interval.
.br
		Net Control (CS6, CS7), 6.25% threshold, increased Codel target & interval.
.PP
.B diffserv4
.br
	Provides a general-purpose Diffserv implementation with four tins:
.br
		Bulk (CS1), 6.25% threshold, generally low priority.
.br
		Best Effort (general), 100% threshold.
.br
		Video (AF4x, AF3x, CS3, AF2x, CS2, TOS4, TOS1), 50% threshold.
.br
		Voice (CS7, CS6, EF, VA, CS5, CS4), 25% threshold.
.PP
.B diffserv3
(default)
.br
	Provides a simple, general-purpose Diffserv implementation with three tins:
.br
		Bulk (CS1), 6.25% threshold, generally low priority.
.br
		Best Effort (general), 100% threshold.
.br
		Voice (CS7, CS6, EF, VA, TOS4), 25% threshold, reduced Codel interval.

.SH OTHER PARAMETERS
.B memlimit
LIMIT
.br
	Limit the memory consumed by Cake to LIMIT bytes. Note that this does not
translate directly to queue size, as there is some overhead in the data
structures containing the packets, especially for small packets.

	By default, the limit is calculated based on the bandwidth and RTT settings.


.SH EXAMPLES
#tc qdisc add dev enp3s0 root cake bandwidth 30mbit
.br
#tc -s qdisc show dev enp3s0
.br
qdisc cake 8001: root refcnt 2 bandwidth 30Mbit diffserv4 flows rtt 100.0ms raw
 Sent 0 bytes 0 pkt (dropped 0, overlimits 0 requeues 0)
 backlog 0b 0p requeues 0
capacity estimate: 30Mbit
.br
             Tin 0       Tin 1       Tin 2       Tin 3
.br
  thresh      30Mbit   28125Kbit   22500Kbit    7500Kbit
.br
  target       5.0ms       5.0ms       5.0ms       5.0ms
.br
interval     100.0ms     100.0ms     100.0ms     100.0ms
.br
Pk-delay         0us         0us         0us         0us
.br
Av-delay         0us         0us         0us         0us
.br
Sp-delay         0us         0us         0us         0us
.br
  pkts             0           0           0           0
.br
  bytes            0           0           0           0
.br
way-inds           0           0           0           0
.br
way-miss           0           0           0           0
.br
way-cols           0           0           0           0
.br
  drops            0           0           0           0
.br
  marks            0           0           0           0
.br
Sp-flows           0           0           0           0
.br
Bk-flows           0           0           0           0
.br
last-len           0           0           0           0
.br
max-len            0           0           0           0
.br


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tc (8),
.BR tc-codel (8),
.BR tc-fq_codel (8),
.BR tc-red (8)

.SH AUTHORS
CAKE was implemented by Jonathan Morton, with contributions from Dave Taht,
Kevin Darbyshire-Bryant, Toke Hoiland-Jorgensen and Loganaden Velvindron.
This manual page was written by Loganaden Velvindron. Please report corrections
to the Linux Networking mailing list <netdev@vger.kernel.org>.
